460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Granular Computing for Machine Learning:
Pursuing New Development Horizons
Witold Pedrycz , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Undoubtedly, machine learning (ML) has demonstrated a wealth of far-reaching successes present both at
the level of fundamental developments, design methodologies
and numerous application areas, quite often encountered in
domains requiring a high level of autonomous behavior. Over
the passage of time, there are growing challenges of privacy and
security, interpretability, explainability, confidence (credibility),
and computational sustainability, among others. In this study,
we advocate that these quests could be addressed by casting
them both conceptually and algorithmically in the unified environment augmented by the principles of granular computing.
It is demonstrated that the level of abstraction, delivered by
granular computing plays a pivotal role in the interpretation
by quantifying the level of credibility of ML constructs. The
study also highlights the principles of granular computing and
elaborates on its landscape. The original idea of a comprehensive
and unified framework of data-knowledge environment of ML
is introduced along with a detailed discussion on how data and
knowledge are used in a seamless fashion by invoking granular
embedding and producing relevant loss functions. Key categories
of knowledge-data integration realized at the levels of data
and model (involving symbolic/qualitative models and physicsoriented models) and investigated.
Index Terms—Gaussian process (GP), granular computing, granular embedding, information granules, knowledge-data
design environment, machine learning (ML).

I. I NTRODUCTION
ACHINE learning (ML) constructs have assumed a
central role in the design and analysis of intelligent
systems. Along with success stories, there have been a rising
awareness about challenges that become more apparent with
the application areas.
Granular computing is regarded as a unified environment
of processing information granules established at a certain
level of abstraction information granules emerge as a sound
conceptual and algorithmic vehicle owing to their way of
delivering a more general view at data, ignoring irrelevant
details and supporting a suitable level of abstraction aligned

M

Received 28 August 2024; revised 15 October 2024; accepted 23 October
2024. Date of publication 18 November 2024; date of current version
20 December 2024. This article was recommended by Associate Editor
F. J. Cabrerizo.
The author is with the Faculty of Automatic Control, Electronics and
Computer Science, Division of Measurements and Control Systems, Silesian
University of Technology, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland, also with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB T6R 2V4, Canada, and also with the Faculty of Engineering and Natural
Sciences, Department of Computer Engineering, Istinye University, 34010
Sariyer/Istanbul, Türkiye (e-mail: wpedrycz@ualberta.ca).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2024.3487934.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCYB.2024.3487934

with the nature of the problem at hand. It is worth exploring
granular computing as a contributor to the methodology of
ML. While some investigations and promising results have
been reported, there is a visible need to explore and establish
main directions as well as build a coherent environment to
cope with the above-stated challenges.
The objective of this study is to deliver a general overview
of granular computing, identify the main pursuits forming a
comprehensive research agenda and identify its far-reaching
and impactful and synergistic role in addressing vital challenges in ML and computational intelligence. We aim to foster
new and far-reaching directions of ML in forming a synergistic
granular computing-ML platform of or granular ML for brief.
There are a number of key objectives which associate with a
significant level of originality.
1) Development a conceptual and algorithmic framework of
ML augmented by the principles of granular computing
(in particular, by forming a cohesive way of constructing
granules through the principle of justifiable granularity
and augmenting models through the mechanisms of
granular embedding).
2) Conceptualization of data and knowledge facets in the
construction of ML models.
3) Identification of crucial roles of information granules
and specification of levels of information granularity
required to realize a unified framework of dataknowledge environment of ML.
ML and granular computing have been developing independently. When some challenges of ML started to surface
more vividly, in particular those concerning interpretability
and transparency, advocated under the banner of explainable
AI (XAI), it becomes noticeable that concepts of information
granularity and information granules (especially fuzzy sets
and rough sets) could support the agenda of XAI. Granular
computing revolves around interpretability which has been
for a long time vigorously emphasized in fuzzy rule-based
models. The quality of ML models becomes also expressed
in terms of nonnumeric outcomes and quantified in terms of
granular results, such as intervals or fuzzy sets. It is likely that
considering the recently growing interest in knowledge-data
ML, the role of granular computing in these pursuits of ML
will attract attention and trigger further investigations.
Serving as a position paper, this study identifies focal points
and highlights future potential directions. To structure our
discussion in a coherent fashion and highlight the main trends
as well as deliver a self-contained material, the study is
structured in a top-down manner. Some introductory material
offering some motivating insights and main concepts and

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2168-2267 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

objectives of granular computing are presented in Section II.
The formal frameworks of information granules are covered in
Section III. Section IV is devoted to the design of information
granules carried out with the use of the principle of justifiable
granularity. We also show linkages of this principle with
unsupervised learning and clarify a role of clusters as datadriven information granules. The key conceptual and design
challenges emerging in ML are highlighted in Section V.
We also offer some useful insights as to the roles of
information granules in addressing these quests. A new and
emerging direction of unified knowledge-data ML is identified
in Section VI. A knowledge-data integration aiming at the
development of ML models is covered in Section VII. The
realization of such integration process is discussed for rulebased models. Main conclusions are covered in Section IX.
II. G RANULAR C OMPUTING —P RINCIPLES , I NFORMATION
G RANULES , AND I NFORMATION G RANULARITY
Granular computing is about information granules. More
specifically, it offers a coherent environment aimed at 1) formalizing information granules via one among existing formal
settings (which have been developed independently of each
other and include sets, intervals, fuzzy sets, rough sets,
probabilistic information granules, among others); 2) eliciting
information granules; 3) establishing processing mechanisms;
and 4) delivering interpretation of results and communicating
obtained findings carried out at levels of abstraction. As a
discipline, granular computing constitutes a well-rounded body
of knowledge and establishes a collection of principles that
apply across the diversity of the existing formal frameworks.
Humans perceive the world, reason, and communicate at some
level of abstraction. Abstraction comes hand in hand with
nonnumeric constructs.
Information granules are intuitively appealing constructs,
which play a paramount role in human cognitive and decisionmaking activities [1], [2], [3], [4]. We perceive complex
phenomena by organizing existing knowledge along with any
available experimental evidence and structuring them into a
collection of some meaningful, semantically sound entities.
Those become central to ensuing activities of describing
the world, reasoning about the environment, classification,
prediction, and decision-making methods. Zadeh [4] coined
an informal, yet highly descriptive and compelling concept
of information granules. Generally, by information granules
one regards a collection of elements drawn together by
their closeness (resemblance, proximity, functionality, etc.)
articulated in terms of some useful spatial, temporal, or
functional relationships. The concept of information granules
is omnipresent, and this becomes well documented through
a series of applications, one may refer to some selected
studies [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].
No matter which problem is taken into consideration, we
usually position it in a certain conceptual framework composed of some generic and conceptually meaningful entities
- information granules. They are relevant to the problem
formulation, further problem solving, and a way in which the
findings are communicated to the external world and recipients

461

of the solution. Information granules realize a framework in
which we formulate generic concepts by adopting a certain
level of generality. In this sense, information granules are
examples of abstractions. As such, they naturally give rise to
hierarchical structures: the same data, problem or system can
be perceived at different levels of specificity (detail) depending
upon the complexity of the problem, available computing
resources, and particular needs to be addressed.
Granular computing fully acknowledges a notion of variable
granularity, whose range could cover detailed numeric entities
and very abstract and general information granules. It looks at
the aspects of compatibility of such information granules and
ensuing communication mechanisms of the granular worlds.
Granular computing gives rise to processing that is less time
demanding than the one required when dealing with detailed
numeric processing.
III. F RAMEWORKS OF I NFORMATION G RANULES
There are numerous formal frameworks of information
granules; for illustrative purposes, we recall and contrast some
commonly considered alternatives by looking at the underlying
concepts and associated abilities to cope with the real-world
problems.
A. Diversity of Formal Settings of Information Granules
The landscape of formal environments of information granules is remarkably diversified. Numerous alternatives fall
under the realm of granular computing. There are convincing
arguments motivating their conceptualization. We also recall
some systematic ways of elicitation of the granules themselves.
Sets realize a concept of abstraction by introducing a notion
of dichotomy. We admit that a certain element either belongs
to a given information granule or is excluded from it. The
notion of interval information granules falls under the same
rubric whereas these constructs are defined over the space of
real numbers leading to discipline of interval analysis (interval
mathematics) [15], [16], [17].
Fuzzy sets deliver an important conceptual and algorithmic
generalization of sets [3], [18], [19] by admitting a notion
of partial membership. This quantification of membership
becomes instrumental in a vast array of situations where the
principle of dichotomy is neither justified. Furthermore, owing
to the smooth (differentiable) nature of membership functions,
fuzzy sets become useful in realizing optimization tasks in
which they are present. This is of particular usage when
considering gradient-based optimization schemes.
Shadowed sets [20] deliver an interesting and practically
sound description of information granules by distinguishing
among three categories of elements of the universe of discourse. Those are the elements, which 1) fully belong to the
concept; 2) are excluded from it; and 3) their belongingness
is completely unknown [21], [22].
The idea of hesitant fuzzy sets [23], [24] along their generalizations admit nonnumeric membership grades. A hesitant
fuzzy set is defined by membership function A which for
any element in the space produces a subinterval of [0,1].
In this sense, a shadowed set can exhibit some resemblance

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

to this construct with a visible difference coming from the
conceptualization of the construct and its construct.
Rough sets [25], [26] are concerned with a roughness phenomenon, which arises when an object (pattern) is described
in terms of a limited vocabulary of certain granularity. The
description of such nature gives rise to so-called lower and
upper bounds of concepts forming the essence of a rough set.
Information granules with concept of membership and
nonmembership A certain class of useful information granules
is aimed at the representation of concepts of membership
and nonmembership. Intuitionistic fuzzy set A [27], [28] is
described by a pair of membership A(x) and nonmembership
functions A∼ (x) with the constraint satisfied for each element x
of the space stating that A(x) + A∼ (x) ≤ 1. The byproduct is a
hesitation index 1-A(x)-A∼ (x). The modifications come in the
form of the Pythagorean fuzzy sets in which one has A2 (x) +
A∼2 (x) ≤ 1 [29] and Fermatean fuzzy sets with the constrain
on the membership and nonmembership expressed as A3 (x) +
A∼3 (x) ≤ 1 [30].
The landscape of formal frameworks is quite diversified;
as interesting examples, one can recall here probabilistic sets,
a slew of probabilistic-fuzzy hybrid models of information
granules, and axiomatic fuzzy sets.
At the practical end, one should emphasize that while the
existing approaches come with some conceptual motivation
pointing at their relevance, it is of paramount importance
to have them equipped with sound development mechanisms
and estimation procedures; in several cases this is not the
case. Design processes along with the evaluation mechanisms
becomes of critical relevance implying successful deployments.
B. Information Granules of Higher Type and Higher Order
From the structural perspective, information granules are
generalized along two directions giving rise to higher order
and higher-type information granules. Higher-type granules
are granules whose membership grades of individual elements
are information granules themselves. The well-known and
intensively studied constructs are type-2 and interval-valued
fuzzy sets. In this case, the membership grades are fuzzy
sets defined over [0, 1] or intervals contained in the unit
interval. Likewise, intervals generalize to granular intervals
where the bounds are information granules, such as fuzzy sets.
The membership grades could be of probabilistic nature and
described by probability density functions defined over [0, 1];
this construct and its generalizations fall under the umbrella
of probabilistic sets. This category of generalizations is well
aligned with the real-world phenomena where one admits that
the precision of numeric membership grades is neither feasible
nor attainable.
Type-2 information granules are generalized to type-n granules where the membership grades are expressed recursively
on a basis of information granules formed at the lower
level of hierarchy. It is worth noting that type-0 information
granules are just numbers. Conceptually, this generalization
looks promising however to take full advantage of such
information granules one needs to establish a systematic way
of elicitation of granular membership grades.

Order-2 and order-n, in general, information granules associate with the generalizations of spaces over which granules
are defined. In contrast to order-1 information granules,
order-2 information granules are used to describe hierarchically complex concepts based on a collection of reference
information granules. For instance, the term comfortable
temperature is described over the family of terms {low
temperature, average temperature, high temperature, very high
temperature} producing the vector of membership grades
[0.4/low temperature 0.9/average temperature 0.5/high temperature 0.3/very high temperature].
IV. D ESIGN OF I NFORMATION G RANULES AND
N UMERIC -G RANULAR C OMPATIBILITY
A task of building information granules constitutes a central
item on the agenda of granular computing with far-reaching
implications on its applications.
A. Principle of Justifiable Granularity
As noted, information granules are designed through the
process of abstracting available experimental evidence. Let
us start with an illustrative example. Consider a collection
of numbers representing readings of temperature over the
past month. By eyeballing them and without any computing,
we conclude that we witnessed high temperature. What has
been done, we build an information granule by arranging
the existing data in a form of a single descriptor located at
the higher level of abstraction. The principle of justifiable
granularity guides a construction of an information granule
based on available experimental evidence [11]. The resulting
information granule becomes a summarization of data (viz. the
available experimental evidence).
This principle mimics this process by admitting that the
constructed information granule is meaningful (semantically
sound) and at the same time well justified in light of the
existing data. Formally, these two intuitively appealing criteria
are expressed by the coverage and specificity measures. The
first one expresses an extent to which the granule “covers”
(includes) the data, viz. it is supported by available experimental evidence. The specificity measure quantifies an extent to
which the granule is specific (precise) and stresses semantics
(meaning) of the granule.
In case of 1-D numeric data {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } as witnessed
in the above example and an information granule given in the
form of a numeric interval A = [a, b], these two criteria are
expressed as cov(A) = card{xk | xk ∈ [a, b])} and spec(A) =
g(length(A)) with g standing for the monotonically decreasing
function, length(A) = b-a, respectively. The criteria are in
conflict; with the objective to maximize both of them, the
optimization problem could be posed as the maximization of
the product of coverage and specificity completed with respect
to the bounds a and b, namely, arg maxa,b [cov(A)spec(A)].
The principle can be extended to multidimensional data and
as a result of optimization, we arrive at the optimal parameters
of the granule describing its geometry; for instance A(x; m)
with m denoting the parameters (geometry) of the granule. In
the above case, m = [a, b].

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

Based on the above stated example, two design strategies
are encountered: 1) both parameters (a, b) are optimized,
and 2) a two-phase process where one starts with a numeric
representative of the numeric data (that could be mean,
median, modal) and then optimizes a and b separately by
maximizing the product of coverage and specificity where
the data lower or larger than the numeric representative are
involved in the calculations. This makes up two optimization
tasks that are 1-D.
The generic design process can be extended in different ways. In general, the principle can be developed and
applied to the construction of information granules expressed
in different formal settings. Furthermore, interesting considerations involve the design scenarios where information
contents are also involved that stems from the ML context:
1) data belonging to different classes and the design is
intended to build the granule of data belonging to a single
class (homogeneous granule); in this construction, inhibitory
information is considered; 2) building granule in the presence
of weighted data; and 3) building granules of the lowest
variability with respect to some auxiliary variable. In these
cases, not only geometric characteristics are formed but the
information content I becomes quantified in the obtained
granule A(x; m, I). Several representative design scenarios are
listed in Appendix.
The principle is also useful in expressing equivalency
between two information granules being expressed in the presence of available experimental data. An information granule A
is equivalent to B in terms of the principle when the equality
cov(A)spec(A) = cov(B)spec(B) is satisfied. This helps us
determine the parameters of A. Likewise, one can build an
information granule expressed in different formalisms, such as
building a fuzzy set equivalent with probabilistic information
granule B. If some underlying probabilistic characteristics of
data are available, the above requirement can be read as
cov(A)spec(A) = p cov(B)spec(B) with p denoting the underlying probability density function.
Probabilistic information granules can be converted into
intervals or fuzzy sets by using the principle of justifiable
granularity. As the probabilistic information granules are
commonly governed by normal distribution, the calculations
are carried out as follows. Let N(0, σ ) denote a Gaussian
probability function p(x) with the zero mean and standard
deviation σ . Assume T is an interval distributed around zero
with a spread d to be optimized.
The coverage is computed
d
in the form cov(T) = −d p(x)dx, whereas the specificity
sp(T) is 1−([2d]/[6σ ]) = 1−(d/[3σ ]). dopt is produced
by maximizing the product of coverage and specificity;
dopt = maxd [cov(T)sp(T)]. In the same way, one obtains
the parameters of the fuzzy set. The corresponding
coverage
d
and specificity are computed as cov(T) = −d T(x)p(x)dx and
1
sp(T) = 0 1−(|bα − aα |/[6σ ])dx, where aα and bα are the
lower and upper bound of the α-cut for fuzzy set T(x). The
optimal spread d for interval and triangular fuzzy set could be
determined by maximizing the product of coverage and specificity. Through straightforward computation, the relationship
between the spread d and standard deviation σ for interval

463

Fig. 1. Computing distance between fuzzy sets A and B based on the use
of a family of α-cuts.

granule is d = 1.15715σ. For a triangular fuzzy set, one has
d = 1.64395σ .
The principle of justifiable granularity highlights an important facet of elevation of the type of information granularity:
the result of capturing a number of pieces of numeric experimental evidence comes as a single abstract entity-information
granule. As numeric data can be thought as information
granule of type-0, the result of their concise description
becomes a single information granule of type-1. This is an
interesting phenomenon of elevation of the type of information
granularity. The increased level of abstraction is a direct
consequence of the diversity present in the originally available
granules. This elevation effect is of a general nature and can
be emphasized by stating that when dealing with experimental
evidence composed of a family of information granules of
type-n, the result becomes a single information granule of
type (n + 1). Thus, we can express this finding in the
form: a number of data of type-n are abstracted to a single
type-(n + 1) information granule.
For instance, numeric data (which are type-0) give rise to
a single information granule (type-1), type-1 data (e.g., fuzzy
sets) give rise to type-2 information granule (viz. type-2 fuzzy
set), . . ., etc.
To Recap: as a way of constructing information granules,
the principle of justifiable granularity exhibits a significant
level of generality in two essential ways. First, given the
underlying requirements of coverage and specificity, different
formalisms of information granules can be engaged. Second,
experimental evidence could be expressed as information
granules articulated in different formalisms and on this basis
certain information granule is being formed.
Clustering methods deliver a sound way of building
information granules. Depending on the way clustering method
is formulated, set-based or fuzzy information granules are
built. In many cases, like those involving K-means [31]
or fuzzy c-means (FCMs) [32], information granules are
formed around the obtained prototypes using the principle
of justifiable granularity. Some discussion is covered in [33].
This two-phase procedure helps facilitate the design process
of information granules. Refer also to detailed algorithmic
considerations covered in Appendix.
An important concept studied in granular computing and
used in its application concerns defining a distance between
information granules expressed in R. An example of computing the distance for fuzzy sets in case of a 1-D space is
illustrated in Fig. 1.
Following [34], the distance between the intervals [a,b] and
[c, d] is computed by taking the lower and upper bounds,
(a-c)2 + (b-d)2 . For fuzzy sets, see Fig. 1, the construct

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

As will be discussed in Section VI-F, the derivative of the
expression 1-cov*sp will be used in the computing the loss
function. For the higher values of a, the plot shows broader
ranges of the linearly changing sections of the expression. This
becomes instrumental in the optimization of the loss function
with the usage of the gradient-based methods.
Fig. 2. Distribution of numeric datum and information granule visualized in
the coverage-specificity space.

V. C HALLENGES OF M ACHINE L EARNING AND
P ERSPECTIVE OF G RANULAR C OMPUTING
With the rapid advances in ML, it becomes apparent that
there are a number of evident challenges. Addressing them is
required to further foster the progress in the area and expand
a spectrum of application areas. We identify several of them
and point out that information granules offer some interesting,
conceptually and algorithmically viable solutions.
A. Confidence/Credibility of ML Results

Fig. 3. Optimization of compatibility—A display in the coverage-specificity
space; and the highest value is achieved when A and x are the same numeric
entities.

Fig. 4. Plot of expression 1-cov*sp shown for selected values of the spread
of the triangular fuzzy set A = T(x; 7-s, 7, 7 + s), s = 0.5 (solid line), 1.5
(dotted line), and 2.5 (dashed line) with x moving along [0,10].

is realized by taking α-cuts Aα and Bα and integrating the
distances d(Aα , Bα ) = (aα − cα )2 + (bα − dα )2 over the
1
threshold values, d(A, B) = 0 d(Aα , Bα )dα.
B. Compatibility of Numeric Evidence and Information
Granule
The use of the coverage and specificity criteria provide
an interesting insight into a way in which a location of
information granule and numeric datum is characterized as
illustrated in Fig. 2. The numeric datum and information
granule (in this case we take a triangular fizzy set) show the
highest level of compatibility (agreement) when both coverage
and specificity are made the highest, namely, the product of
these two measures attains its maximal value, see Fig. 3.
The visualization of the compatibility between a triangular
information granule A with a modal value and bounds and
numeric value sliding across the input space [0, 10] with the
specificity regarded as a linearly decreasing function (with
range = 10) is shown in Fig. 4. Here, plots for As with several
values of spread s are covered.

As data are central to all ML models, the quality produced
by the models are directly implied by the location of a
new situation vis-à-vis data being used for training purposes. Obviously, going beyond some boundaries of acquired
“expertise” of the model associated with substantial risks
that have to be assessed. Questions emerge: given x, what
confidence/credibility level could one associated with the
produced result? Is the result credible? Could the result trigger
some legitimate action or the system so that actionability
becomes secured.
Information granularity plays a pivotal role with this regard.
Instead of a numeric result produced by the model, information
granule produced by the ML can offer a useful and quantifiable
solution to the problem through raising awareness as to the
possible need to acquire more evidence before proceeding
with making any sound decision. The specificity of the output
information granule can serve as a sound measure describing
the quality of the result.
Different formal approaches could be envisioned here. We
recall the two of them.
1) Granular Embedding: Numeric parameters, a, of the
ML model M(x; a) are elevated to their granular counterparts
by forming information granules distributed around them. The
transformation G, A = G(a, ε) denotes the mapping of a ∈ Rp
(with p standing for the number of parameters of the model) to
a p-dimensional vector of information granules A. For interval
embedding, a numeric parameter a is transformed into an
interval spanned over a, [min(a(1-ε), a(1 + ε)), max(a(1-ε),
a(1 + ε))], ε ∈ [0, 1]. The hyperparameter ε denotes a level
of information granularity and its value is optimized through
the maximization of the product of coverage and specificity
of results of the model M(x; G(a,ε)) with the coverage being
computed for the data D used to learn the numeric model
M(x; a). Granular embedding can be applied to input data. To
describe their granularity (as encountered in regression with
uncertain data), instead of numeric x, we admit its granular
counterpart X associated with some level of information
granularity δ, X = G(x, δ). Then we have M(G(x, δ), a). Also,
granular embedding can be completed at the parameter and
data side resulting in M(G(x, δ), G(a,ε)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

2) Gaussian Process: model [35], [36] produces results
that come in the form of probabilistic information granules
described by Gaussian distributions. The process GP(m, κ(x,
x’)) is characterized by some mean function m and covariance
function κ(x, x’). For any x, the GP model GP(y| x, D) gives
rise to the corresponding output viewed in the form of a
Gaussian distribution, N(m, σ ) inferred on a basis of training
data D where the standard deviation σ describes the level of
granularity of the obtained result for given input x. Several
design alternatives are sought with regard to the selection of
kernels realizing the covariance function. A two-phase design
process is invoked: a numeric model is built first and then
a representative subset of training data is used to construct
the GP model thus augmenting the numeric results with the
probabilistic granules.
While the formats of information granules arising from
1) and 2) are different, the results could be treated uniformly by engaging the principle of justifiable granularity.
Another general observation, which is self-explanatory, is
worth making here: there are no ideal ML models. While typen information granules are used to build the model, to be in
rapport with reality, the results produced by the model have to
be type-(n + 1) information granules. In granular embedding,
we advocate granular format of parameters (assuming numeric
data and optimal numeric parameters) which entails granular
results. In the GP model, eventually built on a basis of a
numeric model, the results arise in the form of probabilistic
information granules.
The above augmentations can endow the ML design
methodology with a useful self-awareness mechanism, where
the quality (granularity) of the result not only quantifies the
confidence (and eventually offer some visualization mechanism) but helps the model to become aware of its limitations
and potentially invoke further learning through the mechanisms of active learning [38], [39], [40].
B. Interpretability and Explainability
These two features of ML architectures [41], [42] is one of
the crucial requirements well-articulated in XAI. Information
granules are conceptually and algorithmically viable constructs
as lucidly demonstrated in [43]. Concepts described by fuzzy
sets, rough sets, relationships in the form of rule-based models
and associations have been intensively studied in the literature.
In fuzzy rule-based models, information granularity establishes a suitable level of abstraction (depending upon a
particular application and the needs of the recipient of the ML
model). More rules coming with more specific condition and
conclusion parts capture more details and potentially produce
higher accuracy (at the numeric level), however the interpretability and interpretability become adversely impacted.
One usually admits that any quantification of interpretability
(which is multifaceted) includes in its formulation the number
of rules (and this could be controlled by the number of clusters
produced by the commonly used FCM clustering algorithm).
Its interesting aspect of interpretability is a stability of rules.
Intuitively, as knowledge conveyed (or elicited) by the rules
should not be volatile, we anticipate that the rules observed

465

at a level of information granules and expressing associations
among input and output variables (for instance, causes and
effects) are stable so they do not change their semantics in
the presence of some variations in the data. The rule “if x is
small then y is medium” remains the same even data change
slightly. Obviously, for such distorted data, the linguistic
terms (small, medium) could come with varying membership
functions (different parameter values) but the related meaning
(conveyed by the symbolic contents of the terms) remains
the same. Here, we capitalize on the duality of information
granules, that could be treated either as symbols or numeric
constructs with the underlying parameters.
VI. U NIFIED K NOWLEDGE -DATA E NVIRONMENT OF
D ESIGN OF ML
Data are a holy grail of ML. They are behind the undisputable successes of the discipline. They also come with
challenges that are imminent, in particular in light of the
diversity and the nature of data and their volume. The key
observations concern some essential characteristics of the
multitude of ML constructs, their design and deployment (and
very likely the ones emerging in the future): 1) in virtue of
the underlying complexity and distributed architectures (for
example, consider deep learning networks) are black boxes;
2) going beyond the boundaries of data used to build the ML
architectures (built on the principle of inductive reasoning)
brings a question of credibility/confidence/relevance of the
produced results (which becomes of central importance when
deploying the models in critical environments requiring a high
level of autonomy, consider autonomous vehicles); 3) learning
is commonly realized from scratch, which brings a high level
of computing overhead; 4) loss functions emphasize the quality
expressed in terms of prediction or classification accuracy; and
5) any possible data attack impacts the construction and the
functioning of the model. In light of the arguments put forward
and to emphasize this point on reliance on data in the ML
design methodology, we can refer to the resulting mapping
D → MD with the subscript emphasizing the origin of the
ML model MD .
A. Knowledge
In every real-world problem, there is some knowledge that
as of now has not been accommodated as a part of the design
environment of ML architectures. Going beyond the data in
the development of ML models, sounds attractive and deserves
careful attention. One may anticipate far reaching ramifications
of this conceptualization. The main direction emerging in this
way could be referred to as knowledge-data ML or KD-ML in
brief. In essence, denoting the knowledge as K, the resulting
construct could be expressed as MDK . There are different ways
of representing knowledge and using it in the realization of
the model. Quite commonly, one can envision that the design
of MDK is guided by a general (extended) loss function whose
important component is a regularization term reflecting the
knowledge conveyed in the problem.
For the sake of completeness, one could also remark that the
standard data-oriented practice of ML is to augment the loss

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

function by admitting a so-called regularization term. Its role is
to avoid possible memorization effect by controlling the nature
of the parameters of the constructed model. In the context of
knowledge involved in the design, this term is referred to as
a knowledge regularization component.
B. Taxonomy
When pursuing the agenda of KD-ML, the two fundamental
questions that need to be posed and carefully addressed
concern the origin and taxonomy of knowledge as well as its
suitable representation.
When it comes to the origin and taxonomy of knowledge,
there are several key categories encountered [44].
Scientific knowledge This knowledge is articulated through
universal laws of physics, chemistry and invariants of mass
conservation, moment conservation, etc. For instance, one
can refer to Newton’s law of motion, Maxwell’s law of
electromagnetics and conservation laws (conservation of mass,
moment, energy, . . .).
Interestingly, the considerations developed within this realm
have led to the recent developments of physics-informed
ML [45], [46], [47], [48].
Commonsense knowledge: Two main categories are distinguished here.
1) World Knowledge: This category of knowledge comprises everyday life facts; it is intuitive and validated by
human reasoning (subsumes linguistics) and validated
through empirical studies; various levels of abstraction
(information granules) are present.
2) Expert Knowledge Again: This represents common
knowledge being held by a particular group of experts.
Various levels of abstraction (specificity of information
granules) are also considered.
The theme of knowledge representation has been central on
the agenda of AI. There have been fundamental discussions
on the symbolic and connectionist perspective of knowledge
representation with the associated benefits and limitations,
as convincingly advocated by Minsky [49]. Interestingly, he
made compelling arguments on the role of heuristics being
played in the representation schemes . . .. Our purely numeric
connectionist networks are inherently deficient in abilities to
reason well; or purely symbolic logical systems are inherently
deficient in abilities to represent the all-important heuristic
connections between things–the uncertain approximate or analogical links . . ..

frames with default assignments. These are the schemes
proposed and intensively studied in the area of AI.
D. Knowledge Elicitation
Once some way of knowledge representation has been
decided upon, it must be elicited. In the area of AI, there
have been intensive studies [50], [51] on ways how knowledge can be acquired and its quality evaluated. The key
features of acquired knowledge determining its relevance
involve completeness and consistency, among others. With
the increasing level of complexity and dimensionality of the
problem, any human way of knowledge acquisition is faced
with a phenomenon of knowledge acquisition bottleneck [52].
As a follow-up, there is no guarantee that the knowledge
guidance is ideal and as such its contribution to knowledgedata ML is instrumental but cannot be regarded as the only
player in this design environment.
E. Duality of Information Granules
Information granules exhibit an important feature of duality.
They can be sought as symbols (S, M, L, . . ., etc.) and as
such are subject to symbol processing (for instance, governed
by grammar rules). On the other hand, they are grounded
and their numeric manifestation is subject to number-oriented
processing. If S, M, and L are linguistic terms, we may have
rules of symbolic processing, such as S + M = VL (very
large), etc. but once they are described by numeric membership
functions, operations on them yield some numeric results.
The key point worth making is that knowledge is inherently
represented at the higher than numeric level of abstraction.
Hence, the role of information granules becomes inherently
visible and their usage in KD-ML turn out to be apparent.
Essential is the crucial symbolic and numeric duality of
information granules.
There are two main levels of knowledge integration in
knowledge-data ML, namely, knowledge integration completed at the data level and the integration carried out at the
level of architectures of ML models.
F. Learning
In the presence of data D, the commonly encountered loss
function used in the construction of M (or more specifically
M D ) assumes the following form:

(1)
L=
(M(xk , w) − tk )2 + μ||w||.
D

C. Knowledge Representation
There are numerous and highly diversified formal ways
aimed at knowledge representation including the following.
1) Algebraic equations, differential equations, simulation
results, and spatial invariances (translations and rotations). These fall under the umbrella of ways in which
scientific knowledge is being represented. They serve as
vehicles to support physics-informed ML.
2) Logic rules and rule-based models, knowledge graphs,
relations and relational calculus, semantic networks, and

where the second component is a regularization term whose
contribution to L is guided by the non-negative weight μ. The
norm ||.|| is either L0 , L1 , or L2 . By analogy, the inclusion
of knowledge in the loss function is completed in an additive
form


L=
(M(xk , w) − tk )2 + μ
RK
(2)
D

D

where R(K) denotes the knowledge-oriented regularization.
μ is a non-negative hyperparameter that strikes a balance

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

between the impact of data and knowledge. Its value is
optimized on a basis of the validation set.
The guidance provided by the knowledge model MK provides information granule in the design process. Thus, if for
some x the model MD returns M D (x) at the same time MK
returns granule Y = M K (x). The compatibility is expressed as a
product of coverage and specificity and its derivative becomes
used in the gradient-based optimization of L. In this sense,
the use of the smooth non-Boolean membership function
(information granule) because advantageous to improve the
efficiency of the learning process. The detailed calculations of
the derivative of the knowledge regularization term computed
with respect to the ith component of w, wi are expressed as
d
d
(cov(M(x;w)) =
(1−cov(M(x;w), Y)sp(Y)) = −spY
dwi
dwi
dcovM(x;w) d(Mx;w)
.
(3)
= −sp(Y)
d(Mx;w)
dwi
VII. K NOWLEDGE AND DATA I NTEGRATION IN ML
A. Physics-Informed ML
Physics-informed ML has been intensively pursued in recent
years. As a convincing testimony, one can refer to the recent
collection of studies reported in [53]. There are several
compelling arguments behind this direction of ML studies
including 1) an ability to describe a physical phenomenon at a
global level and 2) endowing the constructed ML model with
locally available data driven model. In the design we engage
some invariants, including laws of mass and momentum
conservation.
The scientific knowledge is described by some relationships
present in the system governed by equation g(x, y, a) = 0
with a denoting a vector of parameters. The dynamic systems
are described with the use of dynamics-oriented models,
namely, differential and partial differential equations. Given
the training data D = (xk , tk ), k = 1, 2, . . . N and D∗
composed of collocation data, the loss function guiding the
development of the ML model M(x; w) is additive consisting
of two components


(M(xk ;w) − tk )2 + (1 − λ)
|gxk , M(xk ;w), a|. (4)
L=λ
D

D∗

The second term of L enforces M to fit the collocation
points. The hyperparameters λ assuming values in [0,1] strikes
a sound tradeoff between the usage of guidance stemming
from data and knowledge sources. As g(x,y, a) is commonly
acceptable and comprehended by the community, the physicsinformed ML promotes interpretability of the resulting model.
B. Augmentation of Data Driven Models by
Knowledge-Oriented Constraints
The data blinding effect (viz. an exclusive reliance on
data) can be reduced by accommodating knowledge -oriented
constraints. The constraints can be sought as sources of
knowledge describing the input-output relationships existing
in the problem.
As an illustrative example, let us consider a single inputsingle output ML model in the form of a neural network

467

Fig. 5. One-dimensional data (a) and Laffer effect (b) providing knowledge
constraints.

NN(x; w) built on a basis of some data D = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }
as illustrated in Fig. 5. The constructed neural network may
suggest a nonlinearly increasing input-output relationship and
its usage for predicting higher values of the input may imply
higher values of the output. The derived conclusion serves as
a simple example of data blinding. This is a direct conclusion
of the fact that the problem is being viewed as exclusively
through the lenses of data and ignoring the commonsense
knowledge. Before proceeding with the design of the neural
network, note that are informed that the input variable is tax
rate (in range 0–100) and the output is a tax revenue. It is
apparent that the continuously increasing relationship could be
simply misleading–indeed 100% tax rate does not offer any
incentive. The relationship is known as a Laffer effect stating
that a total revenue is not maximized with the increase of tax
rates; and beyond some point the workers are disincentivized.
Thus, the data can be augmented by some semantically
sound relationships. In this case, we express them by bringing
three constraints in the form.
1) Including a boundary condition at 100% NN(x;
w)|x=100 = 0.
2) Considering a single optimal value x0 where NN(x0 ;
w) attains maximum, namely, dNN(x; w)/dx|x = x0 = 0.
This relationship captures a certain knowledge-implied
constraint.
3) Requesting the maximum x0 is located as far from
maxk=1,2,...,N xk ; we argue that some maximal and
yet optimal (the higher) value of revenue. The following function ϕ(x) is introduced: it is increasing over
[maxk = 1,2, . . . , N xk , 100] and set to 0 otherwise.
The loss function L becomes formed as a linear combination
whose structure is the same as in (2) involving the data-driven
neural network and the satisfaction of the constraints specified
above

(NN(xk ;w) − tk )2 +
(5)
L=λ
D






 dNN(x;w) 

+ exp(−φ(x0 )) .
(1 − λ) NN(100;w) + 

dx
x=x0
The minimization of the loss function is carried out with
respect to λ, w, and x0 .
C. Constraints as Information Granules
In general, we may formulate a general format of the design
of the ML model M in the presence of knowledge hints
articulated as some constraints and required local extreme
describing the nonlinear characteristics of the model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. Examples of data and information granules expressing knowledgeguided constraints: (a) (Ak , Bk ) and (b) (xk , Bk ), k = 1,2, . . . , N*.

1) Boundary condition M(x; w)|xk=xk∼ = ak where
(xk ∼,tk ∼), k = 1, 2, . . . , N∼ are specified constraints.
2) Local extreme expressed at some predetermined points
(xk *,tk *), k = 1, 2, . . . N, dM(xk*, w)/dxk * = 0.
The knowledge hints as being expressed at higher level
of abstraction could be provided in the form of information
granules to capture the available level of precision. The
constraints are expressed in the form D* = (Ak , Bk ) where
both Ak and Bk are information granules (intervals, fuzzy sets),
k = 1, 2, . . . , N*. The plot of illustrative relationships is shown
in Fig. 6.
The loss function is again additive by involving the databased learning component and the one in which the knowledge
hints are to be accommodated. Because of the granularity of
the constraints, the key point is to determine the distance
between the Yk = M(Ak ; w) and Bk . As we are concerned with
the two information granules, the calculations depend upon the
formalism of information granules under considerations. If Yk
and Bk are intervals, the distance ||M(Ak ; w)-Bk || computed by
considering distances between the bounds of the intervals. If
fuzzy sets are considered, their α-cuts are determined, namely,
Ykα and Bkα and the distances between intervals are integrated
over [0,1]. The loss function reads as follows:
L=λ



Physics-oriented model F supporting the design of ML model M.

while applicable to a vast array of situations (regions of the
input domain), might not be accurate for the actual situation
for which some input-output data are available. The limited
accuracy is observed globally. There is no guarantee that such
data support the design of the ML model, however we may
anticipate that its accuracy is high for the local regions implied
by the location of the data. Fig. 7 illustrates this situation.
Thus, the data-oriented model M is designed with the use of
D and its parameters are estimated leading to M(x; w). While
M interpolates outside the regions occupied by D, its results
are not validated.
On the other hand, F is of global nature, however, not
necessarily fits well the data as M does in a local way.
To quantify this effect, we complete granular embedding by
admitting agranular nature of its parameters a, A = Gε (a)
which gives rise to F(x, Aε ) with ε standing for the level
of information granularity; this hyperparameter is optimized
(maximized) on a basis of D.
The loss function consists of two parts

L=λ
(M(xk ;w) − tk )2 + (1 − λ)
(8)
D
N∗


(1−cov(M(xk ;w), F(xk , Aε ))sp(F(xk , Aε )).

k=1

||M(Ak ;w) − Bk ||. (6) The optimization is realized with respect to w, ε, and λ
assuming values in [0,1] where the minimization of L is
The form of knowledge hints can assume a form of pairs accomplished in the presence of some validation set. One may
(xk , Bk ) where the input is numeric. As before, the loss look at this design scenario as resembling transfer learning
and knowledge distillation [54], however there is an apparent
function is additive and consists of two components
difference. In this scheme, we admit that the performance of
N∗


teacher is manifested in the form of information granules and
L=λ
(M(xk ;w) − tk )2 + (1 − λ)
(1−cov(M(xk ;w), Bk )sp(Bk )).
because of the form of the second term of (8), its impact on
D
k=1
(7) the design of M varies from data to data, while this type of
individual contribution of data is not available in the generic
The second part realizes the matching between Bk and mechanism of transfer learning. Furthermore, in knowledge
M(xk , w).
distillation discussed in the setting of classification problems,
the hyperparameter of temperature softening the original logics
is optimized and its role resemblances the one of the levels of
D. Physics-Oriented ML Models With Granular Expansion
information granularity.
of the Knowledge-Driven Model
D

(M(xk ;w) − tk )2 + (1 − λ)

N∗


Fig. 7.

k=1

The real-world system we are interested to model is governed by the mapping f *: R → [0,1]. f * is a complex system
with eventually varying or stochastically implied parameters.
The physics-driven model F of f * is usually formed because
of intensive research and equipped with some parameters
estimated over data. Such models are deemed to capture
the essentials of the system, and quite relevant to a broad
range of the input variables. However, they are general and

VIII. RULE -BASED M ODELS IN THE R EALIZATION OF
DATA AND K NOWLEDGE E NVIRONMENT
Knowledge and data facet of ML supplement each other to
eliminate potential gaps. Realistically, the data do not “cover”
the entire space (as we can never account for all possible
situations and collect pertinent data). Likewise, knowledge
might not be complete–a problem of knowledge bottleneck

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

Fig. 8.

469

Example set of control rules (fuzzy controller).

was flagged as one of the issues in knowledge-based systems;
some facts and relationships (because of their evident relationships) might be overlooked quite often in the process of
knowledge elicitation.
A. Qualitative (Symbolic) Models
Qualitative models [55] and symbolic processing [56] have
been under intensive studies in the realm of AI, especially
in the eighties, when there was a great deal of studies on
knowledge representation. The key idea behind these models
is to describe relationships among variables (inputs and outputs) at the qualitative (symbolic) level where the variables
are quantified through a collection of symbolic (qualitative)
landmarks. Qualitative reasoning about continuous domains
requires quantization of the domain to a discrete and small
number of symbols. The values being chosen reflect regions of
qualitatively uniform component behavior, whereas interesting
transitions occur at such boundary points.
Apparently, the qualitative models are more abstract than
number-oriented constructs. They do not focus on numeric
detailed aspects but rather tend to reveal qualitative dependencies and in this sense orient toward forming some interpretable
relationships.
B. Rule-Based Architectures
Rule-based models assume a visible position in the realization of symbolic models. This interpretability aspect has been
emphasized in the current trend of studies on XAI. The rules
are conditional statements whose condition and conclusion
parts are articulated with symbols. For instance, the rule reads
as “if x is S and z is M then y is L” where the landmarks
small (S), medium (M), zero (Z), and alike are positioned in
the input and output space. A limited repertoire of landmarks
could consist various symbols (qualitative values), such as
− (negative), Z (zero), and + (positive) as discussed in
qualitative models. The rules are elicited from domain expert.
At the implementation end, a critical step is to ground the
symbols, namely, endow them with sound semantics in the
context of a problem at hand. The symbol grounding involves
intervals and their variants, such as rough intervals or fuzzy
sets.
Fuzzy controllers are positioned in the plethora of symbolic
models (symbolic controllers), see Fig. 8. The constructs well
known in the fuzzy control community are based on control
rules that capture the essence of control strategies. The inputs
are error and change of error while the output is control
variable. In this particular case, the landmarks are implemented
as fuzzy sets. The symbol grounding is completed by admitting

Fig. 9.

Knowledge-data design environment with qualitative model.

some specific membership functions along with the parameters
of the corresponding fuzzy sets. The table captures 25 rules
which at the symbolic level are easily comprehended, for
instance, “if error is negative big (NB) and change of error
is Z (Zero) then control is P (Positive).” On the other
hand, as each symbol is grounded through the corresponding
membership function, the mechanisms of approximate reasoning applied here give rise to numeric values of the output
(control).
Bringing data and knowledge conveyed by symbolic models
requires a mindful process of model design in this heterogeneous environment. It is worth emphasizing that in light of
the symbolic nature of the qualitative models (and the results
produced there), a suitable synergistic mechanism is required
as well as a way of building the model and its validation.
An overall way of building ML models in the presence of
symbolic model and data is displayed in Fig. 9.
On the one hand, as usual, the construction of the ML
model is guided by available numeric data D = (xk , tk ),
k = 1,2, . . . , N. On the other, there is some useful guidance
delivered by the symbolic model. In virtue of the qualitative
nature of this model, they are conveyed in the form of some
information granule which is used directly in the optimization
of the augmented loss function.
Proceeding with the details, we start by symbol grounding
at the side of the symbolic model. Consider that the symbols
are mapped on some ordinal scale viz. the symbols are
associated with the numeric values. For instance, the symbols
NL (negative Large), NM (negative Medium), . . . , defined over
variable of speed are organized with some order imposed NL
≺ NM ≺ . . . and with each of them we associate the numeric
entries a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , organized in increasing order a1 < a2 <. . .
Without loss of generality, we confine these entries to the unit
interval so a = [a1 , a2 , . . ., an ]. They are sought because of
grounding the symbols. Furthermore, assume that the values of
ai s are distributed over the range of values the corresponding
variable in D takes on.
We complete the same embedding mechanism for other
input variables, namely, {bi }, {cl }, and the output variable
{dj }. These numeric values are structured into a vector form
giving rise to a, b, c, and d. Next, they are concatenated into
a single vector A = [a |b| c| d] whose entries are subject
to optimization as discussed in a while. In this sense A
can be sought as the knowledge conveyed by the symbolic
model DK = A. Using A, we build a GP regression. Once
done, for any xk coming from D, the knowledge-based model

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

produces a probabilistic Gaussian information granule with
the corresponding mean value and the standard deviation, viz.
we obtain GP(m(xk ),σ (xk ) |A). This granule is transformed
into an equivalent interval or fuzzy set information granule
following the optimized equivalence relationship discussed in
Section IV-A.
Finally, for each xk , the corresponding output of the
knowledge-based model becomes Yk . In the sequel, the loss
function consists of the two terms
L=λ


D

||M(xk , w) − tk || + (1 − λ)



(1−cov(M(xk , w), Yk )sp(Yk )).

D

(9)
where λ ∈ [0, 1] is a hyperparameter with values in [0,
1] balancing the contribution of guidance coming from data
D and DK . As in the previous situations, the value of λ is
optimized on a basis of the validation set. The minimization is
completed with respect to the model coming from some class
of models M and its parameters described by w, M(x; w).
This minimization is also realized for the assumed values
of the grounding parameters A. They themselves could be
optimized, namely, Aopt = arg minA L. In other words, there
are two nested optimization loops-optimization with respect
to A
− given DK (that is the GP model), optimize M ∈ M and w.

(10)
While the optimization of (9) could be gradient-based,
the nature of the optimization of DK , some population-based
optimization (PSO, ant colonies, differential evolution) could
be considered.
IX. C ONCLUSION
The study has raised and elaborated on the promising facets
of synergy of ML and granular computing. By identifying the
ongoing challenges of privacy, computational sustainability,
confidence (credibility) and interpretability, we have stressed
the importance of the key features of information granules
aimed at the reformulation and conceptualization of the problems and building efficient solutions. It has been demonstrated
that the new and promising and far-reaching direction of
knowledge-data ML can be achieved by structuring a design
framework and formulating coherent loss functions.
There is a broad and productive agenda of future pursuits
located at the junction of ML and granular computing. An
ultimate objective is to enhance the developments of ML by
endowing its constructs by mechanisms of evaluation their
performance by admitting inherent information granularity (of
higher-type/higher order). This may raise awareness about the
limit performance of the models and trigger further actions
by engaging ways of its enhancements (e.g., through active
learning). One can gain flexibility in establishing tradeoffs
and identifying limitations among design criteria of accuracy, stability, interpretability by positioning the development
at a suitable problem-implied level of abstraction. Further
investigations worth pursuing could be focused on the industrial aspects of knowledge-oriented systems, including control
systems [57].

R EFERENCES
[1] W. Pedrycz, Granular Computing. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2013.
[2] W. Pedrycz, An Introduction to Computing with Fuzzy Sets: Analysis,
Design, and Applications. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020.
[3] W. Pedrycz, “Granular computing for data analytics: A manifesto of
human-centric computing,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica, vol. 5,
no. 6, pp. 1025–1034, Nov. 2018.
[4] L. A. Zadeh, “Toward a theory of fuzzy information granulation and its
centrality in human reasoning and fuzzy logic,” Fuzzy Sets Syst., vol. 90,
pp. 111–127, Sep. 1997.
[5] A. Gacek and W. Pedrycz, “Clustering granular data and their characterization with information granules of higher type,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy
Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 850–860, Aug. 2015.
[6] L. Hu and K. C. C. Chan, “Fuzzy clustering in a complex network
based on content relevance and link structures,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 456–470, Apr. 2016.
[7] X. Hu, Y. Shen, W. Pedrycz, X. Wang, A. Gacek, and B. Liu,
“Identification of fuzzy rule-based models with collaborative fuzzy clustering,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 6406–6419, Jul. 2022.
[8] X. Hu, W. Pedrycz, and X. Wang, “Granular fuzzy rule-based models:
A study in a comprehensive evaluation and construction of fuzzy
models,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1342–1355,
Oct. 2017.
[9] J. Leng, Q. Chen, N. Mao, and P. Jiang, “Combining granular computing
technique with deep learning for service planning under social manufacturing contexts,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 143, pp. 295–306, Mar. 2018.
[10] W. Pedrycz, R. Al-Hmouz, A. Morfeq, and A. Balamash, “The design of
free structure granular mappings: The use of the principle of justifiable
granularity,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2105–2113,
Dec. 2013.
[11] W. Pedrycz and W. Homenda, “Building the fundamentals of granular
computing: A principle of justifiable granularity,” Appl. Soft Comput.,
vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 4209–4218, 2013.
[12] W. Pedrycz, R. Al-Hmouz, A. S. Balamash, and A. Morfeq,
“Hierarchical granular clustering: An emergence of information granules
of higher type and higher order,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 23, no. 6,
pp. 2270–2283, Dec. 2015.
[13] W. Pedrycz, R. Al-Hmouz, A. Balamash, and A. Morfeq, “Granular
autoencoders: Concepts and design,” Soft Comput., vol. 23, no. 20,
pp. 9869–9880, 2020.
[14] W. Pedrycz, “Evaluating quality of models via prediction information
granules,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 5551–5556,
Dec. 2022.
[15] G. Alefeld and J. Herzberger, Introduction to Interval Computations.
New York, NY, USA: Academic, 1983.
[16] R. Moore, Interval Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall,
1966.
[17] R. Moore, R. B. Kearfott, and M. J. Cloud, Introduction to Interval
Analysis. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2009.
[18] H. Nguyen and E. Walker, A First Course in Fuzzy Logic. Boca Raton,
FL, USA: Chapman Hall/CRC Press, 1999.
[19] L. A. Zadeh, “The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to
approximate reasoning-I, II, III,” Inf. Sci., vol. 8, pp. 199–251, 1975.
[20] W. Pedrycz, “Shadowed sets: Representing and processing fuzzy
sets,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, and Cybern., Part B (Cybern.), vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 103–109, Feb. 1998.
[21] Y. Yao, S. Wang, and X. Deng, “Constructing shadowed sets and
three-way approximations of fuzzy sets,” Inf. Sci., vols. 412–413,
pp. 132–153, Oct. 2017.
[22] Y. Yao, “Three-way decision and granular computing,” Int. J. Approx.
Reason., vol. 103, pp. 107–123, Sep. 2018.
[23] V. Torra, “Hesitant fuzzy sets,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 25, no. 6,
pp. 529–539, 2010.
[24] Z. Xu, Hesitant Fuzzy Sets Theory. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014.
[25] Z. Pawlak, “Rough sets,” Int. J. Inf. Comput. Sci., vol. 11, vol. 15,
pp. 341–356, 1982.
[26] Z. Pawlak, Rough Sets: Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About Data.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Acad. Publ., 1991.
[27] K.T. Atanassov, On Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets Theory. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2012.
[28] K.T. Atanassov, Interval-Valued Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2020.
[29] R. R. Yager, “Pythagorean membership grades in multicriteria decision making,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 958–965,
Aug. 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEDRYCZ: GRANULAR COMPUTING FOR ML: PURSUING NEW DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS

[30] T. Senapati and R. R. Yager, “Fermatean fuzzy sets,” J. Ambient Intell.
Humaniz. Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 663–674, 2020.
[31] A. K. Jain, “Data clustering: 50 years beyond K-means,” Pattern
Recognit. Lett., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 651–666, Jun. 2010.
[32] J.C. Bezdek, Pattern Recognition with Fuzzy Objective Function
Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: Plenum, 1981.
[33] R. Xu and D. Wunsch, “Survey of clustering algorithms,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 645–678, May 2005.
[34] O. Kosheleva and V. Kreinovich, “Euclidean distance between intervals
is the only representation-invariant one,” Reliable Comput., vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 4–9, 2021.
[35] M. Lifshits, Lectures on Gaussian Processes. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2012.
[36] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006.
[37] R. He, S. Liu, S. He, and K. Tang, “Multidomain active learning:
Literature review and comparative study,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics
Comput. Intell., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 791–804, Jun. 2023.
[38] M. Liu, W. L. Buntine, and G. Haffari, “Learning how to actively learn:
A deep imitation learning approach,” in Proc. 56th Ann. Meeting Assoc.
Comput. Linguist., 2018, pp. 1874–1883.
[39] B. Settles, “Active learning literature survey,” Comput. Sci., Univ.
Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI, USA, Rep. 1648, 2010.
[40] D. Yoo and I. S. Kweon, “Learning loss for active learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 93–102.
[41] A. Adadi and M. Berrada, “Peeking inside the black-box: A survey
on explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 52138–52160, 2018.
[42] A. B. Arrieta et al., “Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts,
taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI,” Inf.
Fusion, vol. 58, pp. 82–115, Jun. 2020.
[43] W. Pedrycz and S. M. Chen, Eds., Interpretable Artificial Intelligence:
A Perspective of Granular Computing. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2021.
[44] L. von Rueden et al., “Informed machine learning—A taxonomy and
survey of integrating prior knowledge into learning systems,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 614–633, Jan. 2023.

471

[45] D. Weikun, K. T. P. Nguyen, K. Medjaher, G. Christian, and J. Morio,
“Physics-informed machine learning in prognostics and health management: State-of-the-art and challenges,” Appl. Math. Model., vol. 124,
pp. 325–352, Dec. 2023.
[46] C. Mao and Y. Jin, “Uncertainty quantification study of the
physics-informed machine learning models for critical heat flux
prediction,” Prog. Nuclear Energy, vol. 170, May 2024, Art. no. 105097.
[47] S. Karimpouli and P. Tahmasebi, “Physics informed machine learning: Seismic wave equation,” Geosci. Front., vol. 11, pp. 1993–2001,
Nov. 2020.
[48] W. Yan et al., “A novel physics-regularized interpretable machine
learning model for grain growth,” Mater. Design, vol. 222, Oct. 2022,
Art. no. 111032.
[49] M. L. Minsky, “Logical versus analogical or symbolic versus connectionist or neat versus scruffy,” AI Mag., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 34–51, 1991.
[50] B. R. Gaines and M. L. G. Shaw, “Eliciting knowledge and transferring
it effectively to a knowledge-based system,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4–14, Feb. 1993.
[51] R. Rush and W. A. Wallace, “Elicitation of knowledge from multiple
experts using network inference,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 9,
no. 5, pp. 688–696, Sep./Oct. 1997.
[52] E. A. Feigenbaum and P. McCorduck, The Fifth Generation. Reading,
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Publ. Company, 1983.
[53] F. Piccialli, M. Raissi, F. A. C. Viana, G. Fortino, H. Lu, and A. Hussain,
“Guest editorial: Special issue on physics-informed machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 964–966, Mar. 2024.
[54] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[55] J. De Kleer and J. S. Brown, “A qualitative physics based on confluences,” Artif. Intell., vol. 24, pp. 7–83, Dec. 1984.
[56] S.-F. Su, W. Pedrycz, T.-P. Hong, and F. D. A. T. De Carvalho, “Guest
editorial special issue on Granular/symbolic data processing,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 342–342, Feb. 2026.
[57] M. R. G. Raman and A. P. Mathur, “A hybrid physics-based data-driven
framework for anomaly detection in industrial control systems,” IEEE
Trans. Syst., Man Cybern. Syst., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 6003–6014,
Sep. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. Downloaded on December 26,2024 at 06:34:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

